---
title: Iroha Uta
category: Japan
layout: post
---
# Iroha Uta / Iroha Poem いろは歌

## Introduction
Not to be confused with `Iroha Uta (いろは唄)` by `Ginsaku`,

The Iroha Uta is a poem that was a used to teach kids Hiragana before switching to the 50 sound system (五十音) (which was popularized in the Meji Era). Iroha Uta is said to be recorded down in the 10th or 11th century.

The poem is special in a sense that:
1. It is a pangram (i.e. no letters repeat).
2. It contains each Japanese Kana once.
3. Unlike the English ABC song, Iroha Uta is a poem that talks about the mortality of life and how you should be pursuing meaningful goals in life. However, this is only one such interpretation. 

## The Poem
The earliest known version of this poem is written in [Manyogana](#null), but here I opted to provide the Historical Hiragana instead (not written by me).

### In Historical Hiragana in it's original ordering

|-|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|
|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|
|1|い|ろ|は|に|ほ|へ|と|
|2|ち|り|ぬ|る|を|わ|か|
|3|よ|た|れ|そ|つ|ね|な|
|4|ら|む|う|ゐ|の|お|く|
|5|や|ま|け|ふ|こ|え|て|
|6|あ|さ|き|ゆ|め|み|し|
|7|ゑ|ひ|も|せ|す|||

To be read in a (row, column) fashion, that is: from (1,1) to (1,7) before going to (2,1) to (2,7) etc.

### Placed in 7-5 Poem structure with its Translation

|Historical Hiragana | Modern Japanese | Translation by Abe Ryuichi|
|-|-|-|
|いろはにほへと|色は匂えど|Although its scent still lingers on|
|ちりぬるを|散りぬるを|the form of a flower has scattered away|
|わかよたれそ|我が世誰ぞ|For whom will the glory|
|つねならむ|常ならん|of this world remain unchanged?|
|うゐのおくやま|有為の奥山|Arriving today at the yonder side|
|けふこえて|今日越えて|of the deep mountains of evanescent existence|
|あさきゆめみし|浅き夢見じ|We shall never allow ourselves to drift away|
|ゑひもせす|酔いもせず| intoxicated, in the world of shallow dreams.|

Translation taken from
`Abe, Ryuichi (1999). The Weaving of Mantra: Kûkai and the Construction of Esoteric Buddhist Discourse. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-11286-6.`

## Example Video

This poem doesn't come with musical score, that is to say, you can actually sing the poem in the tune of `Ah! vous dirai-je, maman` (i.e. `Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star`), but it sounds horrible.

Here is one example [by いろは日本語教室](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_z72YC7gh2U) of how it could be sung to children.

But my favorite version of this song is by `Eri Sugai` version from her album `Kaori`.

Another video worth looking at is by this [youtuber](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ygkipU59WM) who attempted to read the poem in various Japanese IPA.

### About refering to this song
Most of the time, this song is not referred to by the Kanji 色葉. More commonly used is Katakana (イロハ) or Hirgana (いろは) with the word 'song' (歌).

## Hidden Message
If you believe that it is not Apophenia.

Then, performing Vertical reading on the 7th column, there is a "hidden" message. It reads とかなくてしす which can be interpreted as 咎無くて死す which means "Was sinless, yet died (was killed)."

## Some Religious Interpretations/Parallels

Distraction warning.

* [Buddhist interpretation]({{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2023-03-30-Iroha-bu %})
* [Christianic parallels]({{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2023-03-30-Iroha-ch %})
