---
title: Iroha Uta (Buddhist interpretation)
category: Japan
layout: post
---
## Forward:
See sections [Iroha]({{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2023-03-30-Iroha %}).

You may be interested to see the [Christianic parallels]({{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2023-03-30-Iroha-ch%})

## Buddhist interpretation

### Forward
Now, it is important to know that.
1. I'm not a Buddhist, what's more, I'm not a Buddhist who follows Japanese Buddhism
2. The interpretation I am referencing, is [Kunitani Ryuuta's interepretation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_MPezNvnqc).
3. There are various ways to sing the Iroha poem. One way example is by this Youtube Channel [Koyasan Kongobuji](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OuRteZA-HLE). 
5. Kunitani Ryuuta is interpreting Iroha Uta in the 7-5 structure, rather than it's original layout.
6. Any quotes is transliteration by me. And I don't completely translate every single word of his.
7. If you are honestly depressed and seriously suicidal, please do not read further and seek help first before deciding if it is worth the risk to challenging yourself to read any further.

#### Iroha containing Buddhist ideology
Iroha Poem containing Buddhist thinking is not a new concept. It is widely attributed to have been originated from Buddhist monks in Japan.

In fact, if you were to view this from what an outsider thinks Zen Buddhism is about, then this sounds about right.

That when you meditate - which only more advanced monks can do by the way; you should think about your body. How each component is essentially part of your body. What does it mean to be the eye, what does it mean to be the gall bladder, what does it mean to be a skeleton.

What does it mean to be a skeleton? What does it mean to have gender? A woman is also just a skeleton. Her charming smile? Her breasts? Those captivating eyes and skillful hand movements? She is also just a skeleton. That all beauty fades, and women are skeleton too, in the persuit of obtaining enlightenment, you must put the woman side. This is the same for all matters of life.

Or at least, that is what I think when I think about what I heard about Buddhist teaching, that you must be above materialistic things.

#### Chanting.

I particularly like these two variants of the song:
1. [いろは日本語教室's version](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_z72YC7gh2U)
2. `Eri Sugai`'s Iroha song from her album `Kaori`.

This is because:
1. It kinda reminds me of an eternally repeatable chant (cyclic), something like a Tibet prayer wheel. 
2. It is easier to digest to modern listeners
3. Because it is eternally repeatable, the moment you hear "Iroha ni", it causes you to reflect on the entire poem and its interpretation, or on each line and its messages. (Ah ok, smelling flowers. What does it mean to smell flowers? Does it really mean 'flowers' here? What other meanings can it be?)

## Analysis of Iroha Uta's Buddhistic Message by Kunitani Ryuuta

I would like to share with you [Kunitani Ryuuta's interepretation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_MPezNvnqc) of this poem. 

[Skip to the translation](#prelude)

[Skip to the TLDR](#tldr)

### About Kunitani Ryuuta
He claims:
1. to be a teacher in Buddhism in the last 30 years (video released in 2020)
2. be specialized in 浄土真宗 (Joudo Shinshuu), which is commonly translated as "pure Buddhism".

At the point of writing this, I don't know him personally, nor do I understand what this denomination or sect this Buddhism is about. I do not claim to understand the implications of what this group is. However, I have found his understanding to be quite appealing when discussing this poem.

### The video
[Link here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_MPezNvnqc)

If you can understand Japanese (you only need about N4 knowledge), it would be better to watch his video instead of utilizing my transliteration, because it is not one to one.

# Kunitani Ryuuta's Interpretation.

## (Before we start)
Any quotes that I made is a transliteration of what he said unless said otherwise.

Any non quotes are just my input on thoughts (now shifted to footnotes). With the exception of headers and subheaders, which are key ideas from his message.

## Prelude
### Using the word "Iroha" as fundamental
> Just like how Iroha is ABC, which is the fundamental of language. We can say that the "iroha" of economics, means the basics of economics.

> Iroha is the fundamental of fundamentals, to teach kids to learn how to read.

[Footnotes 1](#footnotes )

> We don't know who wrote this, but it must be a monk. Only someone who is familiar with Buddhism can write this.

[Footnotes 2](#footnotes )

## Into the Analysis proper.
### Line 1: 色は匂えど 散りぬるを

[START](https://youtu.be/R_MPezNvnqc?t=136)

> 色 over here -though the word in the dictionary means color; actually refers to flowers.

[Footnotes 3](#footnotes )

> If we talk about Flowers, and Japan, then I want to draw to the attention of Sakura flowers.

> 色は匂えど means, the Sakura flowers are in full bloom right now, but it withers one day. This is the teaching in Buddhism known as 諸行無常.

[Footnotes 4](#footnotes )

> To understand 諸行無常, we must break it into two parts. 諸行 means the physical world, everything. 無常 means 常がない that is, it will always change.

> 万古不変. There is nothing in this physical world that never change. Everything is changing, even if it is done ever so slightly. It fades a way.

> My face, my body, my health, human relationships, the conflicts/bonds between people, house, family, fortune, honor, fame. All these things of the world, including myself, will change. That is 諸行無常.

> To emphasize this 諸行無常 concept, a lot of poets use the word 色.

> Such a beautiful flower, but after three days, it is gone. Such is the nature of Sakura. In the same way, anything that we treat as precious in our lives, will one day fade.

> The Japanese of the past commonly associated (pinned) the idea of 諸行無常 with the Sakura flowers.

> Lots of Sakura Songs - that is, the songs sung in Spring about Sakura; contains 諸行無常 one way another. Both in the past, and today, the Japanese love attributing these ideas to Sakura in their songs.

### Line 2: 我が世誰ぞ 常ならん

[START](https://youtu.be/R_MPezNvnqc?t=281)

> 我が世 means, my personal world , or rather everything under heaven is mine.

> There is a saying "我が家の春を謳歌する" which means the peak of my civilization, is my spring.

> "Everything in this world is mine!" is what 我が世 means

> But here, 世 doesn't just mean the world. It means things that I find precious. My money, my land, my woman, my talents, my pride, my achievements. Anything that we can boast about, is 我が世.

> Because I have this, so I am blessed and satisfied and fulfilled with life. It is the things I find precious

> So with these idea of "things", the line follows with 誰ぞ常ならん.

> No kings and emperors who said "everything in the world is mine" has lasted forever.

[Footnotes 5](#footnotes )

> The Buddhist teaching 盛者必衰 is seen in the line 誰ぞ常ならん

> 盛者 means "the things we accumulate", 必衰 means "is the next thing to waste away".

> As mentioned in the first line, everything in the world changes eventually. The things that we treat with honor, have we seen anyone's honor last forever? All these things eventually wither and waste away, so do our happiness when these things fade.

> We humans normally think, I'm still a youth! I'm healthy! But when we go for our annual checkups and realize that you are actually sick, you become shocked.

[Footnotes 6](#footnotes )

> Or in another example about feeling shocked, I thought I could trust this person with my secrets and life, but he has betrayed me. In that way, we receive shock.

> So for those who never doubt the idea of "things of the world is everything to me" will all experience the great fall, like a deck of cards.

> Of course this is absolutely true, because 諸行無常! Everything changes! Even the heart of men!

> In this way, Iroha Uta starts off and frames the mindset for the next few lines.

> These two lines, talk about our feelings of lostness in life (i.e. I don't know what to do with life) and our pain.

> Everything in the world fades away, so if we treat these things as important, we have to understand that one day we will suffer pain when they are gone.

[Footnotes 7](#footnotes )

### Line 3: 有為の奥山 今日越えて

[START](https://youtu.be/R_MPezNvnqc?t=432)

> Once you consider the first two lines and reach the third and fourth line, the last two are comforting messages. Lines three and four is basically "Despite living in a world where all things are temporal and you will suffer pain, there is a world where you don't need to suffer these pain."

> That is, in Buddhism, you can find happiness that never changes and never fades.

> Now we need to discuss about 有為. In Buddhism there is this concept of 有為転変.

[Footnotes 8](#footnotes )

> 有為転変 means a world where anything can happen at any time. That is, we thought of the world being like this, but it suddenly changes, such is 有為転変.

[Footnotes 9](#footnotes )

> Here in line 3, 山 is used. We are all people who are climbing mountains in life. We don't know what will happen whilst climbing this mountain. Before we get down the mountain, we are always uneasy.

> Well, I digress but, when this poem was written, in the Nara era or Heian period, when climbing a mountain during those time: mountain bandits could appear, wolves, bears, or the paths becoming unwalkable due to deterioration, or even the rocks from the cliffs could fall and crush on us. Even landslides.

> So basically, mountains are somewhere where we feel uneasy. So once we get off the mountain and return home, we feel a sense of security and relief.

> TLDR: Mountains equal to Unpleasant Journey. Such is 有為転変.

> Because everything in the world is fleeting, we don't know when it will suddenly change for the better or worse, so the things that we find precious can also one day just crumble away, so we are always uneasy.

> And here, it is important to note that it says 奥山. Why? Because just as we climbed that mountain and top we could descend, we realize that it is only the local maxima! That is, woe is to me! Another mountain! I have not reached a place where I can find rest. That is 奥山. The mountains continue forever as if there is no end.

> I thought that by climbing this mountain, I would be able to descend and find a sense of relief, but no, that was not the case.

> I thought I was done with this big project, but another giant one arrives before I can even celebrate. And again, the sense of anxiety, uneasiness, woe, insecurity and everything hits us again.

[Footnotes 10](#footnotes )

> So as we discuss 有為の奥山, the next part of this line says 今日越えて. This means, Finally! Finally! Finally! I've reached the end of all of this. I've finally conquered!

> This means, I've finally reached True Happiness.

[Footnotes 11](#footnotes )

> When do you achieve this? 今日越えて doesn't mean you achieve this when you die, but when you are still alive!

> In Buddhism, it is very common to be dismissive of the world, and say 死んだら仏 (when you die, you become a Buddha). We say this to the grieving families during a wake service. Or as it is said 死んだら誰もが仏となって浄土, that is you reach the pure land when you die. That you reach peak enlightenment. I feel that lots of people have this imagery that Buddhism is always above death.

[Footnotes 12](#footnotes )

> However, in Iroha Uta doesn't say when you die, then you reach the peak. It says, today. Not when you die.

> In the pursuit of Buddhism, we will all one day find true happiness while we are still alive, which will let us utter the words "I'm so glad to be born a human."

> 親鸞聖人 taught us about that using the following four words: 現生不退.

[Footnotes 13](#footnotes )

> 現生 means now. That is we are now in the flesh (the body) now. Which is the same thing as 今日 in Iroha poem.

> From a life of suffering, to a life of joy. 不退 here refers to 不退転の幸せ, which is unwavering happiness.

> Sometimes you hear politicians saying this. That they have unwavering (不退転) determination. 不退転 means it wouldn't wither or break away.

> So 現生不退 means, an unwavering true happiness, can be found whilst still in the flesh.

> Sometimes you hear things like this. That it's not humanely possible to experience happiness that never fades, or colors that never fade, or even excitement that doesn't grow stale. How can we of the flesh receive this kind of idea?

[Footnotes 14](#footnotes )

> In response, we have line 4.

### Line 4: 浅き夢見じ 酔いもせず

[START](https://youtu.be/R_MPezNvnqc?t=743)

> 浅き夢見じ means that world we are describing isn't a shallow dream.

> 酔いもせず means that I'm sober. I am telling you about this world whilst sober.

> People in all sorts of life, when they hear "it is possible to achieve ultimate happiness in this life" will think "that's absurd, impossible, aren't you just dreaming (夢)?"

> As if, we were people who dream that I was born to meet this person, and become infuriatingly in love with them. But those feelings are just short lived and dreamy. Eventually these people will come back to reality. No, we are not that kind of people.

> In other words to 夢見じ means to dream and forget about reality.

> What line 4 is saying is, a world where true joy is found, isn't a shallow dream. it exists.

> And to talk about drunkenness here means, when you are drunk you forget what reality is.

> Earlier we talked about how in life there is lots of pain. When we consume things that make us drunk, it makes us very happy and high.

> Drunkenness can mean due to Alcohol, drugs like Cannabis and Opium etc. When you consume these you become high, right? You would feel "oh why is life so fun!" and be placed into a shallow dreamy state and forget reality.

[Footnotes 15](#footnotes )

> The poem is saying: We are different. This world really exist in reality. We aren't high.

> And what is this "reality" the poem is talking about? It is mentioned in lines 1 and 2. A world where things are subjected to constant change, if we are supported by these things, we will continually be in a world of anxiety.

> The poem concludes that: Despite having seen this reality extremely clearly, you can definitely achieve a state of mind where you find true happiness and bliss exist.

## TLDR

Although most people - including the Japanese themselves; would associate the Japanese Buddhism as a way of life or a religion where: only through death that they may find life. However as the message of this poem describes, it is not.

This poem, written by a Buddhist monk, is saying that true bliss -not one where it is derived from Alcohol, Drugs, Sex, Money, Power, Fame, Things of the world; can be attainable in life despite the world bring a terrible place.

And that the implicit message, or so I would like to think it contains an implicit message, is that this bliss is found through pure Buddhism.

### Last additional notes

"有為の奥山 今日越えて", that is translated as "Arriving today at the yonder side of the deep mountains of evanescent existence", is sometimes seen to mean that one has died and reached enlightenment. 

### Footnotes
1. As a side note, the Westminster Shorter Catechism is for kids too ^^;.
2. I don't necessarily agree with this statement, but I do not disagree with it either.
3. To interject Ryuuta, 色 can also be erotica.
4. Here I believe he implicitly believes that the listener are Japanese. Because he doesn't explain that when the Sakura flowers are in full bloom, you can smell it.
5. This reminds me of the story of [Ozymandias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ozymandias).
    > I met a traveller from an antique land
    Who said: Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
    Stand in the desert. Near them, on the sand,
    Half sunk, a shattered visage lies, whose frown,
    And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command,
    Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
    Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
    The hand that mocked them and the heart that fed:
    And on the pedestal these words appear:
    "My name is Ozymandias, king of kings:
    Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!"
    Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
    Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare
    The lone and level sands stretch far away. - Percy Shelley, "Ozymandias", 1819 edition
6. Here you need to note that Japan has a national annual health check program that does not just height and weight, but blood tests that all needs to do (including foreigners who are staying in the country for long term).
7. I would like to interject and say, this is why the more, some of these are precious. Like family.
8. 有為 is `saṅkhata`, `saṅkhata` is something along the lines of the "law of existence"
9. An extreme example I can give, is how the events of [September 11](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/September_11_attacks), the airplanes crashing into World Trade Center in New York City,  has affected the world today.
10. Big true. Assignment hell.
11. I find that it is possible to also interpret 有為の奥山 今日越えて as you've finally triumphed over a world where you no longer hoard after things of the world (Cars, Watches, Toys, Computers, Books, Humans).
12. [This article](https://shinrankai.jp/article/159) examines that ideology even further.
13. 親鸞聖人 refers to a Buddhist monk named [Shinran](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shinran).
14. Like sex. Like listening to your favorite music for 20 hours straight. Or the meow meow meow meow song for 10 hours straight.
15. Or toadstool. 